when Western atheists want to criticize
Christianity they'll often talk about
empirical methods and empiricism becomes
something that separate from and opposed
to the religious mentality some
Christians also square off and accept
this and say okay we have a realm that's
based on faith
revelation magic and the other hand you
have a realm of knowledge that's based
on things that can be observed things
that you can see and hear and ultimately
measure or quantify create scientific
textbooks of it so some Christians
basically accept the opposition that
atheists want to engage in when they're
criticizing Christianity and some will
reject it on one grounds or another the
very strange game that's gone on with
Buddhism and some other Eastern
religions has been to try to argue that
Buddhism itself is an empirical religion
the Buddhism is beast on science or
scientific attitudes can read some
really crazy statements that the Buddha
himself was a scientist was a medical
doctor that his attitudes were 100%
rational and scientific with very
carefully selected quotations from from
here and there in the in the Pali Canon
whether or not you sympathize that
direction it's worth thinking about
what's what's wrong with it and how it
relates to that broader question of
empiricism men and science modernity
the idea of the empirical comes out of a
medical concept in ancient Greece that
instead of working from theories to
select the correct treatment a doctor
would work from examples tried in the
past trial and error producing remedies
that work and we consider what you mean
by theory in the ancient world it's
things like theories of the humerus
duties of the colors theories that you
can diagnose someone based on on
abstract principles that you know we now
know to be false and that sometimes the
ancient world really had their organs in
in myth um however the relationship
between empirical experience and
religion has always been complicated by
a few factors when people declared it
only the public in America today
if only the public could have empirical
attitudes then we wouldn't have this
conflict with religion if only people
could have empirical attitudes various
social values and virtues would result
they think what they hope a bit which um
sadly it's not true the attitude is the
expectation is if if only you would
believe in what you can see then the
world would change if only you could
believe the evidence before your eyes
and be decisive the fact that of course
God never shows up that most religious
claims have no visible proof behind I
think it's only lately that people have
felt confident enough to really put this
forward while ignoring the fact that if
you spend time with people of religious
conviction they don't feel any conflict
about believing in what they see because
they do see what they
they believe in things and they see them
there are people who believe in ghosts
and they have seen ghosts now whether
you choose to call that a hallucination
or a dream or some other kind of
experience from their perspective their
empirical perspective that's something
they see and they know directly this
idea is discussed and debated back in
the original definition of the meaning
of the word skepticism I wish more
people who call themselves skeptics
would actually read each in text like
like sexist in therapists and and
realize where this intellectual
tradition comes from but the ancient
skeptics were very concerned with the
fact that the senses were unreliable
what you see and what you hear can't be
trusted that isn't a simple source of
rational ideas it's quite complicated
but not a totally modern critique of
empirical experience is the philosopher
Karl Popper Karl Popper is a hundred
percent pro science anti-religion also
anti-communist and against an overly
theoretical approach to the world
however he was also critical of the ways
of which empirical experience can lead
us to conclusions that are actually
unscientific so you know like everything
worth touching the poet it's it's a lot
more complicated once you once you start
to dig into it how has it been that in
the last hundred years and especially
since the end of world war two so many
Buddhists have been promoting this
notion of Buddhism as a religion that
doesn't rely on faith as Buddhism as a
religion with no supernatural ideas as
Buddhism and being the the so-called owl
of physics Buddhism as being some kind
of exception to the rules about the
conflict between what's empirical and
what is religious well there are
passages in the ancient texts where
Buddhists say come on you have to
believe what you see with your
that's true and the Saint texts from the
scene ancient period of time in the
Saint Canon and from spoken by the same
people will also tell you that they have
seen ghosts themselves that they have
seen demons that they have seen people
be tortured in hell that they have seen
dialogues with in nura god of each in
India dialogues with the Buddha and
Indra various other monks also went up
to heaven had a dialogue with Indra and
hallucinatory experience is part of the
core practice of meditation that is
described in the public Canon you have
detailed dialogues with the Buddha from
monks who are followers of the Buddha
some as they will pour very specific
things like well you know I'm having
these visions of the the Otherworld the
heavens and so on but I'm I'm not
hearing the sound so you know what why
is that the Buddha gives an answer oh
yeah okay you've achieved purification
of the eye but not purification of the
year so you're you're only getting part
of the experience when you see these
other realms and you have dialogues from
the Buddha and monks or followers who
complained that they're doing everything
right but they're not having this
supernatural experience which is also
interesting it's interesting that you
get some complaints against Buddhist
orthodoxy preserved inside the texts
that define and describe go to Orthodox
that is an interesting difference
between Buddhism and other religions
however I've got to tell you the
movement to frame the Buddha as a
rational scientific thinker to frame
Buddhism as a skeptical religion has
relied on fraud whether it's pious fraud
or not is immaterial to me it's been
intellectually dishonest and it's rely
on quoting a little piece of text here
and there and say oh don't read the
paragraph before it or after it don't
read the
read the whole book you know I think
that the Buddha did preach and there are
different contexts in which he preaches
that people should believe in what they
see and what they know directly for
themselves it also is is abundantly
obvious that the Buddha felt confident
in a magical world view that embraced
demons hell heaven or heavens and many
gods it was a very magical universe that
he thought he was living in and you know
that he encouraged his followers to
continue to believe in that magical
world he was not teaching them to be
skeptical of it or to reject that world
although at the same time he was
teaching to be skeptical of for example
on the caste system to project the
justifications for social inequality
that weren't engineer there are also
texts some of which are quite Americans
were he's skeptical of racism and the
idea that black people are inferior
dark-skinned people within India are
inferior there are many many cultural
ideas that he was kept loved he's
completely skeptical of the authority of
the Vedas the ancient texts of Hinduism
however as with many important thinkers
in history the fact that you have
original and innovative ideas in one
area does not mean that you reject that
he is in another area contrary to
popular belief Isaac Newton who was an
innovator in science remained
steadfastly and profoundly Christian and
he led to lecture British Parliament
about his views on Christianity and his
crazy theories about the history of the
world and the descendants of Adam and
Eve how they move up the world so many
great scientists world religious
eccentrics it's very well preserved for
history but in the case of the Buddha
he's not a scientist he is a religious
leader
who
religious views and I think it's rather
shameful for people to try to try to
suppress the evidence of what those
views were in the name of protecting and
promulgating that religious tradition so
what is the future of Buddhism if nobody
today or fewer and fewer people let's
say nobody if nobody is motivated to
study these texts because they believe
that if they don't they'll go to help
what's the what the future of Buddhist
philosophy if people aren't motivated to
memorize and recite these texts because
they think it'll help them go to heaven
after they die but they think it'll help
them achieve nirvana and this lifetime
what is going to motivate a sincere
scholarship of these texts I'm going to
give you two answers one it is not going
to be a fraud claiming that the core of
these texts is completely rational
completely scientific and completely
skeptical in its attitudes that fraud
will not take you very far in the last
50 years the game has been played out um
- don't compare the situation of
Buddhism today to a failure to the
religions that have died disappeared
let's compare it to something successful
compared to Shakespeare nobody is
agonizing about the study of Shakespeare
disappearing from this world there are
thousands of people who are dedicated
experts in the scholarship of
Shakespeare and there are hundreds of
thousands who are not experts but who
care enough that they study and have a
level of expertise above and beyond the
average person and then there are
millions of people for whom Shakespeare
is is part of their culture it's part of
what's meaningful in their life it's
part of what's enjoyable and entertain
and then there's a limit there are
millions more who are not interested
Shakespeare I think Shakespeare is
boring and that's fine nobody's pulling
the hair out over the future of
Shakespeare Shakespeare's got movies
Shakespeare's gonna book so you cut
poems people are kind of read to people
or could enjoy them the Shakespeare
industry is doing fine guess what nobody
is engaged in the cultural production of
Shakespeare because they think that if
they don't they'll go to hell nobody
thinks if they the cheeks here contains
the secret to get them in heaven after
they die and to my knowledge nobody is
obsessed with creating the fraud that
Shakespeare had completely modern
scientific values secretly that had been
concealed by corruptions and later
additions to his texts by other authors
survived no people with other
perspectives trying to somehow censor
him and make it into a riddle so you
know if the future of Buddhism is going
to be meaningful it can't be based on a
concealment of evidence it can't be
based on a an attitude of censoring what
the myths and legends really are and on
the other hand if there is if you don't
have the confidence that this philosophy
is worth reading to the same extent that
Shakespeare is that that Buddhism can't
be meaningful important in Asian culture
the way she experienced meaningful
important in European culture then this
discussion isn't worth having and for
you the future of Buddhism isn't worth
fighting